IT 250: Digital Economy
BIM 8
th Semester
Nature of course: Information Technology and Computing
Credit hours: 3
Lecture hours: 48
Course Objectives
The course aims to enhance students’ cognitive knowledge and practical skills in digital
technologies in the field of economics and management.
Course Description
This course deals with the introduction to digital economy, fundamentals of digital economy,
digital markets, strategy and innovation, digital transformation, economics of information, and
digitalization from a Nepalese perspective.
Couse Details
Unit 1: Introduction 8 LHs
Digital economics: concepts, drivers, and ecosystem; K-economy: concepts and drivers;
Differences between digital economy and k-economy; The fourth industrial revolution:
drivers, opportunities, and challenges; and Influence of digital economy: sustainability,
privacy, regularity, and strategies.
Unit 2: Fundamentals of Digital Economy 7 LHs
Multi-sided platforms: Network effects and positive feedback; Lock-in and switching
costs; Formulation of monopolies in the digital economy; and Digital adoption index and
OECD digital adoption government index.
Unit 3: Digital Markets, Strategy and Innovation 10 LHs
Competition, cooperation, and competition; The layered internet model; Digital
innovation; Digital business models; Value creation models; and Modeling of digital
markets.
Unit 4: Digital Transformation 8 LHs
Digital transformation: concepts and drivers; Accelerating SDGs through digital
transformation; Role of technological revolution in the world economy; Globalization
and economic growth in the digital age; and Digital currencies: concepts and types.
Unit 5: Economics of Information 8 LHs
Asymmetric information: concepts and determinants; Asymmetric information and
digitalization; Online search engines; Artificial intelligence; Strategy and the new
economics of information; Effects of digitalization on consumer choice and labor
markets; and Intellectual property and digitalization.
Unit 6: Digitalization in Nepalese Perspective 7 LHs
E-governance: concepts, process, and structure; E-governance practices in Nepal; Digital
financial inclusion in Nepalese financial markets; Opportunities and challenges for digital
transformation in the public sector; Digital transformation and the economic performance
in trade, tourism, agriculture, and SMEs.
Suggested Reading
Øverby, H., & Audestad, J. A. (2021). Introduction to digital economics: Foundations, business
models and case studies (2nd ed.). Springer.
Maheshwari, A. (2019). Digital transformation: Building intelligent enterprises. Wiley.
Adhikari, G. M. (n.d.). Digital economics (Recent ed.). Kathmandu.