IT 247: E-Commerce and Internet Marketing
Credits: 3
Lecture Hours: 48
Course Objectives:
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of e-commerce
and internet marketing to students. After completing this course, students will be able to
 Understand different types of e-commerce and its importance to organizations,  Know about different e-commerce business models,  Understand technology infrastructure for e-commerce,  Know the process of building e-commerce applications,  Understand security threats and solutions to e-commerce transactions,  Know different payment systems for e-commerce and
 Learn different concepts Internet marketing and learn to use different digital marketing
tools available.
Course Description:
This course covers different concepts of e-commerce including introduction, business models,
technology infrastructure, building e-commerce applications, e-commerce security and payment
systems. This course also covers different concepts of concepts internet marketing.
Course Details
Unit 1: Introduction to E-Commerce 4 LHs
What is E-Commerce? Importance of E-Commerce; E-Commerce vs. E-Business;
Technology Building Blocks; Unique Features of E-Commerce; E-Commerce Types;
Understanding E-Commerce: Organizing Themes. Unit 2: E-Commerce Business Models and Concepts 8 LHs
E-Commerce Business Models; Major Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Business Models;
Major Business-to-Business (B2B) Business Models; How E-Commerce Changes
Business: Strategy, Structure, and Process. Unit 3: E-Commerce Infrastructure 6 LHs
The Internet: Technology Background; Internet Infrastructure and Access; The Web;
Features and Serves of Internet and Web; Mobile Apps. Unit 4: Building an E-Commerce Presence: Websites, Mobile Sites, and Apps 8 LHs
Imagine Your E-Commerce Presence; Building an E-Commerce Presence: A Systematic
Approach; Choosing Software and Hardware; E-Commerce Site Tools; Building Mobile
Website and Mobile Applications.
Unit 5: E-Commerce Security and Payment Systems 10 LHs
E-Commerce Security Environment; Security Threats; Technology Solutions;
Management Policies, Business Procedures, and Public Laws; E-Commerce Payment
Systems. Unit 6: Internet Marketing 12 LHs
Introduction to Digital Marketing; Importance of Digital Marketing; SEO; On-Page and
Off-Page Optimization; Concepts of Pay-Per-Click (PPC) Advertisement, Digital Display
Advertising, E-Mail Marketing, Social Media Marketing, Mobile Marketing, and Web
Analytics. Laboratory Works:
The laboratory work includes developing an e-commerce web application and learning to use
different digital marketing tools such as Google Ads, Google Search Console, Google Keyword
Planar, Google Analytics, Social Media Analysis tools etc.
Suggested Reading
Kenneth C. Laudon and Carol Guercio Traver, E-Commerce: Business, Technology, and
Society, 17th Edition, Pearson, 2023.
Ian Dodson, The Art of Digital Marketing, Wiley, 2016.