IT 238: Data Structure and Algorithms
BIM 3rd Semester
Credits:3
Lecture Hours: 48
Course Objectives
Main objective of this course is to introduce data abstraction and data representation in memory,
describe, design and use of elementary data structures such as stack, queue, linked list, tree and
graph, introduce algorithms and their complexity. Course Description
The course contains Introduction of data structure and algorithms, Complexity Analysis, Linked
Lists, Stacks, Queues, Recursion, Trees, Graph, Sorting, Searching and Hashing.
Course Details
Unit 1: Introduction to data structure and algorithms 4 LHs
Data types, Data structure and Abstract date type (ADT), Operations performed in data
structure, Introduction to Algorithms, Computational complexity, Asymptotic notations:
Big-O, Big-Ω and Big-Ө Notation, Properties of Big-O, Ω and Ө Notation, Finding
Asymptotic Complexity: Examples. The Best, Average, and Worst-Case analysis. Unit 2: Linked Lists 7 LHs
Basic Concept, List and ADT, Array Implementation of Lists, Linked List, Types of
Linked List: Singly Linked List, Doubly Linked List, Circular Linked List, Basic
operations in Linked List: Node Creation, Node Insertion and Deletion from Beginning,
End and Specified Position, Skip List, Lists in java.util: LinkedList, ArrayList
Unit 3: Stack 4 LHs
Basic Concept of Stack, Stack as an ADT, Stack Operations, Stack Implementation
(Array and Linked List), Stack Applications, Conversion from infix to postfix/prefix
expression, Evaluation of postfix/ prefix expressions, Stacks in java.util. Unit 4: Queues 4 LHs
Basic Concept of Queue, Queue as an ADT, Primitive Operations in Queue, Linear
Queue, Queue Implementation (Array and Linked List), Circular Queue, Priority Queue,
Queue Applications. Unit 5: Recursion 2 LHs
Recursive Definitions, Method Calls and Recursion Implementation, Direct Recursion, Indirect Recursion, Tail Recursion, Nested Recursion, Excessive Recursion, Factorial,
Fibonacci Sequence, GCD, Tower of Hanoi (TOH) Problem, Recursion Vs Iteration.
Unit 6: Trees 9 LHs
Introduction of Trees, Applications of Tree, Tree as an ADT, Binary Trees, and Types of
Binary Trees. Implementing Binary Trees, Tree Traversal: in-order Pre-order, Post-order, Binary Search Tree Operation: Insertion, Deletion, Searching, AVL Trees, Expression
Trees, Operations on Expression Trees, Heap, Huffman Algorithm, Self-Adjusting Trees,
Multiway Search Tree: B-Tree. Unit 7: Graphs 7 LHs
Introduction of graph, Graph as an ADT, Graph Representation. Graph Traversals: BFT,
DFT, Greedy Algorithm, Shortest Path Problem: Dijkstra Algorithm, All-to-All Shortest
Path Problem: Floyd Warshall Algorithm, Spanning Trees and Minimum Spanning Tree:
Kruskal and Prims Algorithm, Topological Sort. Unit 8: Sorting 6 LHs
Introduction, Internal and External Sorting, Sorting Algorithms: Bubble Sort, Insertion
Sort, Selection Sort, Heap Sort, Quicksort, Mergesort, Radix Sort, Efficiency of sorting
algorithms, Sorting in java.util. Unit 9: Searching and Hashing 5 LHs
Introduction, linear search, binary search, efficiency of searching algorithms, Hashing,
Hash Functions: Division, Folding, Mid-Square Function, Extraction. Collision
Resolution technique, Hashing in java.util. Laboratory Works:

The laboratory work consists of implementing the algorithms and data structures studied in the
course. Lab work will be implemented on Java. Student should implement at least following
concepts:  Array and Linked List implementation of List  Stack operations and Queue operations  Recursion
 Linked List implementation of Stack and Queues  Binary Search Tree  Graph Representation
 Spanning Tree and Shortest Path Algorithms  Sorting, Searching and Hashing algorithms