IT 246: IT Ethics and Cybersecurity
(BIM 6th Sem)
Course Objectives
The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge of different concepts of ethics related
to Information Technologies and cyber security. After completing this course, students will be
able to
 Understand different concepts of ethics, and ethics for IT workers and IT organizations,  Know intellectual property and related concepts and issues,  Gain knowledge of threats, cybersecurity and digital forensics,  Know the provision of cyber law in the context of Nepal.
Course Description
This course presents different concepts of IT ethics, cyber threats, cybersecurity, and digital
forensics. This course also presents provision of cyber law in the context of Nepal.
Course Details
Unit 1: An Overview of Ethics 5 LHs
Ethics; Ethics in the Business World; Corporate Social Responsibility; Fostering
Corporate Social Responsibility and Good Business Ethics; Improving Business Ethics;
Ethical Considerations in Decision Making; Ethics in Information Technology
Unit 2: Ethics for IT Workers and IT Users 5 LHs
Managing IT Worker Relationship; Encouraging Professionalism of IT Workers;
Encouraging Ethical Use of IT Resources among Users; Key Privacy and Anonymity
Issues; Social Networking Ethical Issues
Unit 3: Intellectual Property 6 LHs
Intellectual Property; Copyright; Patient; Trade Secrets; Intellectual Property Issues:
Plagiarism, Reverse Engineering, Open Source Code, Competitive Intelligence,
Trademark Infringement, and Cybersquatting
Unit 4: Ethical Decision in Software Development and Ethics of IT Organizations 5 LHs
Software Quality and its Importance; Strategies for Developing Quality Software; Use of
Contingent Workers; Outsourcing; Whistle-Blowing; Green Computing
Unit 5: Fundamentals of Cybersecurity 6 LHs
Introduction to Cyberspace and Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity Perspectives, Key
Development Areas and their impacts on the ever-evolving nature of Cybersecurity:
Technological Changes, Economic Model Shifts, and Outsourcing, Risks Cybersecurity
Mitigates, Common Cyberattacks, Poisoned Web Service Attacks, Network
Infrastructure Poisoning, Technical Attack Techniques, Cyberattackers and Their Colored
Hats.
Unit 6: Personal Cybersecurity 5 LHs
Evaluating Your Current Cybersecurity Posture: Home Computer, Mobile Devices,
Internet of Things (IoT) Devices, Enhancing Physical Security, Cybersecurity
Considerations When Working from Home, Securing Your Accounts, Passwords.
Unit 7: Social Engineering and Cyber Terrorism 5 LHs
Introduction, Need for Social Engineering, Reasons for Social Engineering Attack,
Understanding the Implications, Building Trust, Exploiting the Relationship, Performing
Social Engineering Attacks, Social Engineering Countermeasures, Preventing Social
Engineering Attacks, Cyber Terrorism, Types of Cyber Terrorism, Effects of Cyber
Terrorism in Infrastructure, Countering Cyber Terrorism.
Unit 8: Digital Forensics 7 LHs
Introduction, Computer Forensic to Digital Forensics, Stages of Digital Forensic, Role of
Digital Evidence, Methods and Lab, Collecting, Seizing and Protecting Evidence,
Recovering Data, Mobile Forensics, Legal Aspects of Digital Forensics, Cyber Forensics
in Nepal
Unit 9: Cyber Law in Context of Nepal 4 LHs
Cyber Law in Context of Nepal, Legal Perspective of Cybercrime, Electronic Transaction
Act, Electronics Transaction Rules, IT Policy, Information Security and Policies.
Laboratory Work
The laboratory work includes learning to use tools and techniques for cybersecurity and
digital forensics. Special focus will be given to network scanning, sniffing, identify
common vulnerabilities in web applications such as SQL Injection, XSS, phishing using
social engineering toolkit lab, password cracking, firewall configuration and analysis
Lab, incident response.
Suggested Readings:
Ethics in Information Technology, Sixth Edition, George W. Reynolds.
Ethics and Technology: Controversies, Questions, and Strategies for Ethical Computing, Fifth
Edition, Herman T. Tavani, John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
Ethics for Information Age, Eighth Edition, Michael J. Quinn, Pearson.
Cybersecurity All-in-One for Dummies, Joseph Steinberg; Kevin Beaver; Ted Coombs; and Ira
Winkler, 2023, 1st Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc
Cybercrime and Digital Forensics: An Introduction, Thomas J. Holt, Adam M. Bossler, Kathryn
C. Seigfried-Spellar, 2022, 3rd Edition, Routledge
Electronic Transaction Act (ETA), Government of Nepal.
Electronic transaction Rule (ETR), Government of Nepal.
IT policy Of Nepal